---
title: "Biography"
slug: "biography"
date: 2026-02-10T03:45:00-06:00
category: "Origin"
date_display: "February 2026"
author: "Oyparaploo"
methodology: "Wonderful Garbage"
style: "Noir Song"
---

born in 1959 on the black soil flatlands of central Minnesota. as a child inspired by Peanuts comic strips and during middle school the loose rustic gritty rural life paintings of Andrew Wyeth. his grandmother Katie Murphy Otto encouraged him to keep up his artistic talents she believed was passed to him from his aunt and godmother Rosemary Otto Wegscheid. who died tragically during her twenties as the result of a farm related accident. Grandma Katie saved almost everything he did. including a small tempera painting he created when he was six. of a bleeding cross within a composition of circular energy and natural forms. that she framed and hung on her bedroom wall. his parents William and Joan Otto were also very encouraging.

got his unbridled creative spirit growing up in a small community. with the ability to explore nature and the countryside with his bicycle whenever he wanted to. a place that was conservative when it comes to art but very diverse in types of personalities and character. and there were creative short nicknames to go with most of them. high school highlights included meeting and talking to painter Philip Pearlstein at a St. Cloud keg party and learning about Asian and Middle-Eastern and European cultures and art in high school art teacher Alan Halm's living room library. created numerous photo-realistic oil and watercolor paintings during the four years before attending The Minneapolis College of Art and Design in 1978. receiving a B.F.A degree in design.

first real world project was to create a greeting card line for Gibson Carothers and Recycled Paper Products. most unusual commercial art assignment was to purchase Ukrainian compartment dolls at an eastern European gift shop. sand and prime the surface of the seven forms and paint a variety of business people holding a phone receiver to their ear. in the Ukrainian folk art style. to communicate the split up of US West telephone company. for Fallon McElligott Rice. during his twenties created illustrations and hand-lettering for a long list of local national and international advertising agencies and retail department stores. highlights during this period included creating paintings for the cover of a popular fashion magazine in Milan Italy. he recalled the strangeness of being in a subway and noticing a fashionably dressed man with bright colored scarf reading a magazine with one of his paintings on the cover. and at the same time hearing a song by Minneapolis musician Prince coming out of a subway speaker. during the same year put together his first one man show of large scale paintings. inspired by his travels abroad to Paris and Kaiserslautern and Milan. at Stanley Korshak on Michigan Avenue near Watertower Place in Chicago.

during his late thirties after experiencing extreme exhaustion or burn out of the soul. began to shift his attention away from commercial art and illustrative paintings and murals. to studying and emulating eighteenth century Northwest Coastal Native American sculpture and artifacts. inspired and fueled by a summer vacation visit to The Canadian Museum of Civilization located in Ottawa Canada. immediately after returning to the Twin Cities set up a woodcarving shop in his garage and explored and mastered many similar carving finishing and assembling techniques. a couple years after parts from these artifacts and displays were included with his contemporary art assemblages and installations that followed. his primitive combined with modern sensibilities lead to several public art opportunities. as alternative whole health natural healing methods started to be included in medical hospital settings. sculptural wall murals with small to large wood forms fitting and connecting together like a puzzle. and found objects embedded into carved out portions of wood forms. the goal was to provide a very tactile touch and feel experience and offer patients and visitors to the urban hospital wings an immediate connection to real aspects seen and felt out in nature.

during his forties did the opposite of the normal trends towards more narrowed in specialization. on his own exploring creative and artistic possibilities going in many directions. the only consistency being an evolution towards more personal and intimate subjects. growing from his persistent desire to record his thoughts and feelings and improve his creative and descriptive writing capabilities. his art started to figuratively and literally mirror his actual day-to-day existence. each day was something new and it was also the beginning of his art performances including spontaneously imagined costumes and improvisational storytelling. following this period was more explorative and expressive painting composing and assembling. and his work also started to include more national and international topics. information and issues that appeared in the world section of mainstream and alternative newspapers. with the constant hunger to become more aware of what was going on beyond his studio walls he created many new paths that have lead to the curious and unique associations that can be seen in his work today. drawings. hand-writings. paintings. photographs. collages. artifacts. assemblages. exhibits. videos. audio soundtracks. and writings
